posts/2013-08-04-hakyll-github-and-travis.markdown, before:

---
title: Hakyll, Github and building a static site with Travis.ci
---

Hello World! Here I am, I've got a blog now!
There's still a lot missing: a decent design, code highlighting, comments etc. But I can add these later. After all, what's the most important thing about blogging? Right, content.

So, for a first post, I'll share my blogging setup. Being a Haskell fan and proponent of simple systems, I had no other choice but to use Jasper van der Jeugt's excellent [Hakyll](http://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/) static site generator.
And since I like version control and Github, I'm hosting my site on [Github Pages](http://pages.github.com/).


## The basic setup

After [installing Hakyll](http://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/tutorials/01-installation.html), you can create a simple site by running

    $ hakyll-init your-name.github.com
    $ cd your-name.github.com

This generates a directory structure that looks like this:

    $ tree
    .
    ├── about.rst
    ├── contact.markdown
    ├── css
    │   └── default.css
    ├── images
    │   └── haskell-logo.png
    ├── index.html
    ├── posts
    │   ├── 2012-08-12-spqr.markdown
    │   ├── 2012-10-07-rosa-rosa-rosam.markdown
    │   ├── 2012-11-28-carpe-diem.markdown
    │   └── 2012-12-07-tu-quoque.markdown
    ├── site.hs
    └── templates
        ├── archive.html
        ├── default.html
        ├── post-item.html
        └── post.html

The file `site.hs` contains the rules for building the site, specified in Hakyll's DSL. I won't go into the details of this, as there are [already](http://yannesposito.com/Scratch/en/blog/Hakyll-setup/) [many](http://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/) [tutorials](http://mark.reid.name/blog/switching-to-hakyll.html) [explaining](https://benjeffrey.com/posts/building-benjeffrey.com-with-hakyll) how to set up routes and build rules. Let's quickly initialize a git repository and set up synchronization with it's github counterpart with

    $ git init
    $ git remote add origin https://github.com/your-name/your-name.github.com.git

You can now build the site with 

    $ ghc --make site.hs
    $ ./site build

This outputs the final site in the directory `_site`.
But here we have a problem.
Github Pages serves the content of the repository `your-name/your-name.github.com` on the same domain.
Our content, however, is in subfolder `_site`!
One neat trick that I learned from [Agam Brahma](http://agam.github.io/posts/beginning-with-hakyll.html) to deal with this, is the following: You create one extra branch in the repository, named `source`, that will contain the source code for your static site.
The static site itself will reside in the default `main` branch.
To synchronize them, you add your repository (the `main` branch) as a git submodule under the directory `_site` to the `source` branch of the same repository. If you didn't understand the last sentence, no problem. Just run the following:

    $ git commit --allow-empty -m "dummy first commit"
    $ git push origin master
    $ git checkout --orphan source
    $ git remote add https://github.com/your-name/your-name.github.com.git _site

Now you can build your site and push it to Github:

    $ vim about.rst
    $ git add --all
    $ git commit -m "edited about page"
    $ git push origin source
    $ ./site build
    $ cd _site
    $ git add --all
    $ git commit -m "new about page"
    $ git push origin master
    $ cd ..

The website should now be live at `your-name.github.com`.


## Building the static site with Travis CI

One cool thing about using Github Pages and the [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com/) static site generator is that you can push your source code to Github and Github will take care of building and publishing your site.
You can achieve a similar effect by using [Travis CI](http://travis-ci.org), a hosted continouos integration service for open source projects.
We're not going to use Travis for testing, though. Instead, we will misuse it as a tool that runs our builds our website whenever we push some changes to our repository and publish.[^1]
Specifically, we will make Travis install Hakyll, build the `site` executable, generate the static site and publish the changes to Github.
For the last step, we will need to authorize Travis to publish changes to the Github repository.
We will use a url to the Github repository with HTTP authentication information to do this. To make sure nobody sees your password, run

[^1]: Apparently, I'm [not the first one](http://wesleyhales.com/blog/2013/03/29/Fun-with-Static-Site-Generators-and-Travis/) who has the idea of using Travis CI for this purpose.

   $ gem install travis
   $ travis encrypt "REPO_URL=https://your-name:password@github.com/your-name/your-name.github.com.git"

Travis uses a configuration file named `.travis.ci` in the main folder of your repository.
After many trial builds and configuration changes, I arrived at this version of `.travis.ci`:

    language: haskell
    branches:
      only:
        - source
    env:
      global:
        - secure: "the secret you just generated"
    install:
      - cabal install hakyll
      - ghc --make site.hs
    before_script:
      - cd _site
      - git checkout master
      - git pull origin master
      - cd ..
    script: ./site build
    after_script:
      - cd _site
      - git status
      - git add --all
      - git config --global user.email "your@mailaddress.com"
      - git config --global user.name "Travis"
      - git commit -m "snapshot $(date '+%m/%d/%y %H:%M')"
      - git push "$REPO_URL" master | grep -v http
      - cd ..

Some details requiring some explaining about this:

* We use Travis only on the `source` branch.
* To make sure we don't run into merge conflicts, we always pull all changes to `_site` repository.
* Git requires us to configure a user name and email address before making a commit.
* The tool `grep` is used to hide the line with the repository url and the HTTP authentication information.

Commit this file, and [set up](http://about.travis-ci.org/docs/user/getting-started/) Travis. Now you should be ready to go! Edit some file, push it to Github and your changes should be live ... about 15 Minutes later. Yeah, that's a bit long, but installing Hakyll on Travis takes some time. I'll try to reduce that time and will let you know when I have found out how to do so. In the meantime: Happy publishing and Haskell hacking!

Commit message:

added images, made corrections to hakyll, github and travis post

posts/2013-08-04-hakyll-github-and-travis.markdown, after:

---
title: Hakyll, Github and building a static site with Travis CI
---

Hello World! Here I am, I've got a blog now!
There's still a lot missing: a decent design, code highlighting, comments etc. But I can add these later. After all, what's the most important thing about blogging? Right, content.

So, for a first post, I'll share my blogging setup. Being a Haskell fan and proponent of simple systems, I had no other choice but to use Jasper van der Jeugt's excellent [Hakyll](http://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/) static site generator.
And since I like version control and Github, I'm hosting both the [source](https://github.com/timjb/timjb.github.com) and the generated site on Github using [Github Pages](http://pages.github.com/).


## The basic setup

After [installing Hakyll](http://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/tutorials/01-installation.html), you can create a simple site by running

    $ hakyll-init your-name.github.com
    $ cd your-name.github.com

This generates a directory structure that looks like this:

    $ tree
    .
    ├── about.rst
    ├── contact.markdown
    ├── css
    │   └── default.css
    ├── images
    │   └── haskell-logo.png
    ├── index.html
    ├── posts
    │   ├── 2012-08-12-spqr.markdown
    │   ├── 2012-10-07-rosa-rosa-rosam.markdown
    │   ├── 2012-11-28-carpe-diem.markdown
    │   └── 2012-12-07-tu-quoque.markdown
    ├── site.hs
    └── templates
        ├── archive.html
        ├── default.html
        ├── post-item.html
        └── post.html

The file `site.hs` contains the rules for building the site, specified in Hakyll's DSL. I won't go into the details of this, as there are [already](http://yannesposito.com/Scratch/en/blog/Hakyll-setup/) [many](http://jaspervdj.be/hakyll/) [tutorials](http://mark.reid.name/blog/switching-to-hakyll.html) [explaining](https://benjeffrey.com/posts/building-benjeffrey.com-with-hakyll) how to set up routes and build rules. Let's quickly initialize a git repository and set up synchronization with it's github counterpart with

    $ git init
    $ git remote add origin https://github.com/your-name/your-name.github.com.git

You can now build the site with 

    $ ghc --make site.hs
    $ ./site build

This outputs the final site in the directory `_site`.
But here we have a problem.
Github Pages serves the content of the repository `your-name/your-name.github.com` on the same domain.
Our content, however, is in subfolder `_site`!
One neat trick that I learned from [Agam Brahma](http://agam.github.io/posts/beginning-with-hakyll.html) to deal with this, is the following: You create one extra branch in the repository, named `source`, that will contain the source code for your static site.
The static site itself will reside in the default `main` branch.
To synchronize them, you add your repository (the `main` branch) as a git submodule under the directory `_site` to the `source` branch of the same repository. If you didn't understand the last sentence, no problem. Just run the following:

    $ git commit --allow-empty -m "dummy first commit"
    $ git push origin master
    $ git checkout --orphan source
    $ git remote add https://github.com/your-name/your-name.github.com.git _site

Now you can build your site and push it to Github:

    $ vim about.rst
    $ git add --all
    $ git commit -m "edited about page"
    $ git push origin source
    $ ./site build
    $ cd _site
    $ git add --all
    $ git commit -m "new about page"
    $ git push origin master
    $ cd ..

The website should now be live at `your-name.github.com`.


## Building the static site with Travis CI

One cool thing about using Github Pages and the [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com/) static site generator is that you can push your source code to Github and Github will take care of building and publishing your site.
You can achieve a similar effect by using [Travis CI](http://travis-ci.org), a hosted continouos integration service for open source projects.
We're not going to use Travis for testing, though. Instead, we will misuse it as a tool that runs our builds our website whenever we push some changes to our repository and publish.[^1]
Specifically, we will make Travis install Hakyll, build the `site` executable, generate the static site and publish the changes to Github.
For the last step, we will need to authorize Travis to publish changes to the Github repository.
We will use a url to the Github repository with HTTP authentication information to do this. To make sure nobody sees your password, run

[^1]: Apparently, I'm [not the first one](http://wesleyhales.com/blog/2013/03/29/Fun-with-Static-Site-Generators-and-Travis/) to have the idea of using Travis CI for this purpose.

   $ gem install travis
   $ travis encrypt "REPO_URL=https://your-name:password@github.com/your-name/your-name.github.com.git"

Travis uses a configuration file named `.travis.ci` in the main folder of your repository.
After many trial builds and configuration changes, I arrived at this version of `.travis.ci`:

    language: haskell
    branches:
      only:
        - source
    env:
      global:
        - secure: "the secret you just generated"
    install:
      - cabal install hakyll
      - ghc --make site.hs
    before_script:
      - cd _site
      - git checkout master
      - git pull origin master
      - cd ..
    script: ./site build
    after_script:
      - cd _site
      - git status
      - git add --all
      - git config --global user.email "your@mailaddress.com"
      - git config --global user.name "Travis"
      - git commit -m "snapshot $(date '+%m/%d/%y %H:%M')"
      - git push "$REPO_URL" master | grep -v http
      - cd ..

Some details requiring some explaining about this:

* We use Travis only on the `source` branch.
* To make sure we don't run into merge conflicts, we always pull all changes to `_site` repository.
* Git requires us to configure a user name and email address before making a commit.
* The tool `grep` is used to hide the line with the repository url and the HTTP authentication information.

![A build on Travis CI](/images/blog-travis.png)

Commit this file, and [set up](http://about.travis-ci.org/docs/user/getting-started/) Travis. Now you should be ready to go! Edit some file, push it to Github and your changes should be live ... about 15 Minutes later. Yeah, that's a bit long, but installing Hakyll on Travis takes some time. I'll try to reduce that time and will let you know when I have found out how to do so.


## Bonus: Editing on Github

![Editing this post on Github](/images/blog-github.png)

Since Github supports
[creating](https://github.com/blog/1327-creating-files-on-github),
[renaming](https://github.com/blog/1436-moving-and-renaming-files-on-github) and
[removing](https://github.com/blog/1545-deleting-files-on-github)
files, I can now update my site from any computer in the world which has a web browser,
without needing to have Git or Hakyll installed.
